# Simm-Lib

Simm-Lib is an implementation of version 2.2 of the value at risk Standard Initial
Margin Model ([SIMM™ 2.2](https://www2.isda.org/functional-areas/wgmr-implementation/))
developed by ISDA, see [here](https://www.isda.org/category/margin/isda-simm/) for methodology specifications.
It has been built to be compatible with the Common
Risk Interchange Format (CRIF) and it's correlation parameters and risk
weights are interfaced to allow them to be easily exchanged. This makes
Simm-Lib easy to deploy, as most users of Simm-Lib will already be
generating CRIF files; easy to maintain, as the yearly updates to
SIMM™ can be handled with only minor changes to Simm-Lib; and
easy to experiment with, as custom model parameters can be created for
Simm-Lib and implemented with the same minor changes as the yearly updates.

Users of Simm-Lib who wish to deploy it for commercial purposes
will need to obtain a license from ISDA to use ISDA SIMM™ to
calculate initial margin for their or their clients’ non-cleared
derivatives transactions. Please contact isdalegal@isda.org for more
information on licensing the ISDA SIMM™.

### Updates: 2019-10-15
The Library is now passing ISDA's unit tests for SIMM 2.2, as well as the optional test
to test worst-of calculation functionality.

## Getting Started
Simm-Lib is built with Apache Maven, so one must get Maven
installed on their machine.

Ubuntu users need only run in a terminal:
```
$ sudo apt-get install maven
```

Similarly, Mac users who have [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) installed
can run:
```
$ brew install maven
```

All others can go to the [Maven homepage](https://maven.apache.org)
for specific instructions on how to download and install Maven with
any operating system.

To confirm that Maven has been successfully downloaded, check
the Maven version on your machine by running:
```
$ mvn -version
```
If Maven has been successfully installed, this command should return
something like:
```
Apache Maven 3.5.0 (ff4wa5hff; 2017-04-03T15:39:06-04:00)
Maven home: --MavenHomeDirectory--
Java version: 1.8.0_91, vendor: Oracle Corporation
Java home: --JavaHomeDirectory--
Default locale: en_US, platform encoding: UTF-8
OS name: "mac os x", version: "10.11.6", arch: "x86_64", family: "mac"
```

#### Installing
Simm-Lib's sources have to be moved onto a local machine. This
can be accomplished by either downloading them as a zip file from
GitHub, or by running in a terminal:
```
$ git clone <repo> simm-lib
```
Next, the code's artifacts need to be built. As Simm-Lib is a Maven
project, this process is simplified to running:
```
$ mvn compile
```
After this, Simm-Lib should be fully ready to run in a local
environment.

## Testing
To run all of Simm-Lib's tests, simply run:
```
$ mvn test
```
If one wants to run individual tests, or an individual test module,
the easiest way is to open Simm-Lib in some IDE and run the tests from
that.

#### Testing Breakdown
While there are simple tests to check the functionality of the
individual methods of Simm-Lib, the main focus of the test suite is to
confirm that the outputs of SIMM and Simm-Lib match. To accomplish
this, the tests take in sensitivities and then run Simm-Lib's
calculation, checking the result against SIMM's result:
```java
@Test
public void test() {
    Sensitivity IR1 = new Sensitivity("RatesFX", "Risk_IRCurve", "GBP", "1", "6m", "OIS", new BigDecimal("200000000"));
    Assert.assertEquals(new BigDecimal("13400000000"), Simm.calculateStandard(Arrays.asList(IR1)).setScale(0, RoundingMode.HALF_UP));
}
```

With the addition of the `Schedule` and `Simmple` classes the CRIF formatted objects have expanded beyond the `Sensitivity` object
however the format of the testing is still generally the same as this is the main use case of the model.
#### Simm Class
This section focuses on the tests for the top level functionality
of the `Simm` class, as the methods of this class directly consume CRIF
formatted data in the form of the `Sensitivity` object and return the calculated IM of those inputs. There are six
methods in the `Simm` class: `calculateStanard()`, `calculateAdditional()`,
 `calculateTotal()`, `calculateTreeStandard()`, `calculateTreeAdditional()`, and `calculateTreeTotal()`.
The first method returns the IM of the input sensitivities, the second returns the Additional
IM generated by regulatory restrictions (this includes additional value created from product class multipliers),
while the third is the sum of the previous two methods. The "Tree" methods of similar names do the exact same
calculation, except the intermediate exposures at key points are saved in a tree structure to give a more thorough
view of how the exposure was calculated. All methods return the calculated value in US Dollars, so users of
Simm-Lib working in other currencies should be sure to include the "amountCurrency", and "amountUSD" columns in their
CRIF files.

The inputs to these methods are CRIF formatted data-types where all amounts are
stored as `BigDecimal` and all other values as `String`:
```
AddOnNotionalFactor(product, factor)
ProductMultiplier(productClass, multiplier)
AddOnFixedAmount(amount, amountCurrency, amountUSD)
AddOnNotional(product, notional, notionalCurrency, notionalUSD)
Sensitivity(productClass, riskType, qualifier, bucket, label1, label2, amount, amountCurrency, amountUsd)
```
For `Sensitivity`, `AddOnFixedAmount`, and `AddOnNotional` the "currency", and
"amountUSD" can be omitted; however, the currency in this case will be assumed
to be US Dollars.

#### Schedule Class
This section focuses on the `Schedule` class. As the Schdule model is focued on trade level data, unlike the SIMM model which uses
sensitivities, new trade-level CRIF formatted objects have been added to the module to store this data. The `ScheduleNotional` object
stores the notional amount of the trade (Note: the notional can be set to be positive or negative, and if multiple notionals exist
for the same trade they will be netted, the absolute value of the netted notional is then used in the calculation itself).
The `SchedulePv` is the Net Present Value of the trade (similarly, the PVs will be netted by trade, and the netted value will be used).
```
ScheduleNotional(tradeId, schduleProductClass, valuationDate, endDate, amount, amountCurrency, amountUsd)
SchedulePv(tradeId, schduleProductClass, valuationDate, endDate, amount, amountCurrency, amountUsd)
```
The schdule module provides overloaded `calculate()` and `calculateTree()` methods
to handle both calculating the net gross rate from the input net present values, and using an input NGR instead.
All exposure amounts are returned in US Dollars.

#### Simmple
This section focuses on the `Simmple` class. The inputs to `Simmple` have been stream-lined at least from a CRIF object perspective.
`Simmple` takes in `Crif` objects which are a super-set of all of the other CRIF formatted objects used by either the simm or schedule modules.
The intent of the `Crif` object is to be able to directly translate a standard CRIF file into a `List<Crif>`.
```
Crif(tradeId, valuationDate, endDate, notional, notionalCurrency, imModel, productClass, riskType, qualifier, bucket, label1, label2, amount, amountCurrency, amountUsd, postRegulation, collectRegulation)
```
You'll notice that some fields added to the `Crif` object are not in any of the other CRIF formatted objects. The `imModel` field is simply a `String` which
indicates which model (SIMM or Schedule) that line of data should be input into. The current allowed model strings are **"SIMM", "SIMM-P", "Schedule"**.
The `notional` and `notionalCurrency` fields are for convenience when running a schedule calcualtion. If a trade only has `SchedulePv` inputs
but the `notional` field is set for at least one of those PVs, a `ScheduleNotional` will be constructed using the `notional` value. The `productClass` is overloaded to be
either the SIMM or Schedule product classes depending on the specified model. The `postRegulation` and `collectRegulation` fields are used for Pledgor and Secured regulation
respecitively. There are three different modes of specifying regulation:
- If all regulators are left blank for both post and collect, all `Crif` objects in the input list will be included in the calculation. A blank regulator string is considered
to be the empty string **""**, any number of spaces with no other characters, or an empty set of brackets **"\[\]"** which may also conatin any number of spaces.
- If some regulators are set **"include"** and all others are left blank, then all `Crif` objects which have **"include"** as one of its regulators will be included in the calcualtion.
- Otherwise, the regualtors may be set to a single name (**"CFTC"** or **"\[SEC\]**) or a comma seperated list of names (**"CFTC,SEC"** or  **"\[CFTC,SEC\]"**). When calculating the exposure
of a particular regulator, only `Crif` whose regulators are associated with the role you are running the calculation for will be included. An example of this would be if a `Crif` had its
`postRegulation` set to "CFTC" and its `collectRegulation` set to "SEC". If you are running a calculation for the regulator "SEC" and the role is set to Pledgor, the example `Crif` would not
be included in the calculation, but if the role was set to Secured the example `Crif` would be included.
For simplicities sake, we call the regulator with the highest calculated exposure to be the 'winning' regulator of a 'Worst-Of' calcualtion.
The output of every fucntion in the `Simmple` class is a `ImTreeResult` which contains the winning regulator, an `ImTree` breakdown of the exposure
associated with the winning regulator, and finally the currency of all of the margins in the `ImTree`. The method names of the `Simmple` class should be fairly
self-explanatory: `calculateSimmWorstOf()` returns the winning regulator calculating using only SIMM model `Crif`, `calculateScheduleWorstOf()` returns the winning regulator
calculating using only Schedule model `Crif`, and `calculateWorstOf()` returns the winning regulator calculating over the `Crif` in both models.

### Change Log

#### 2018-09-14
- `Schedule` class has been added to handle Schedule IM calculation. New CRIF formatted objects
`ScheduleNotional` and `SchedulePv` are the inputs to the model. Methods for calculating Schedule IM
both with an input Net Gross Rate, or with the NGR being calculated from the input PVs have been provided
- `Simmple` class has been added to handle 'Worst-Of' regulator handling and calculation by role. The CRIF formatted
object `Crif` which is a super-set of the `Sensitivity`, `ScheduleNotional`, `SchedulePv`, `ProductMultiplier`, etc.
objects has been added to simm-ple to allow for easier translation from a standard CRIF file to the libraries objects
- Simm-ple handles three modes of regulation handling: all regulators left blank, 'include', and standard regulator names.
- The SIMM calculation models inputs have been changed slightly. Now instead of redundantly requiring a `Map` object of the
input `AddOnType`s, the calculation methods instead take in a `List`. This streamlines testing and makes usage easier.
- A calculation currency input has been added to the SIMM model with v2.1, so now the model explicitly
filters out FX Delta risk to the calculation currency from the input sensitivities.
- Simm-Lib passes ISDA's Unit Test for SIMM™ 2.1.

#### 2018-04-04
- Simm-lib has been restructured to be more easily parsed, and also to more easily implement `ImTree` functionality.
As a result, ImTree functionality has been expanded to include Additional-IM sensitivities, and the strict `Bucket` level
view that the library took previously has been loosened.
- `ImTree` is now an interface, and **no longer** parses directly to the standard IM-Tree CSV format. Instead, a CSV formatted `String`
can be obtained from the `static` method `ImTree.parseToFlatCsv()` which takes an ImTree object as an input.

#### 2017-12-11
- Simm-Lib now includes IM-Tree functionality for non-Additional-IM Sensitivities.
An `ImTree` data structure, which parses directly to the standard IM-Tree CSV format, has been added to carry the IM-Tree structure.
- `ImTree` takes a strict view of the 'Bucket' level of IM-Tree and doesn't distinguish between different
currencies in the FX risk class as all currencies are in the same bucket per ISDA's documentation.
- Simm-Lib has added the Base Correlation Sensitivity Type to the Credit Qualifying risk class.
- Simm-Lib now passes ISDA's Unit Test for SIMM™ 2.0 confirming the accuracy of the calculated exposure.

#### 2018-11-25
-The library has been expanded to now include both a Schedule IM calculation model, and
a SIMM calculation model. Post and Collect regulation handling has been added, taking a
'Worst-Of' approach, and along with this IM can now be calculated by role (either Pledgor
or Secured) for both the SIMM and Schedule models.
-The Schedule IM model is (unsurprisingly) contained in the schedule model. Following the
same format as the SIMM model, the main methods of the module can be found in the `Schedule`
class. See below for more specifici information on the module.
-The 'Worst-Of' handling and role calculation is handled by the simm-ple module. The main calculation
methods can again be found in the `Simmple` class. Again, see below for more specific details.
